.TH CONFGEN 1 "2024\-03\-22"
.SH NAME
.B confgen
\- Configuration file template engine

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B confgen
.RI [ CONFGENFILE ]
.RI [ OUTPATH ]
.RI < --eval\ [CODE] >
.RI < --post-eval\ [CODE] >
.RI < --watch >
.br
.B confgen --compile
.RI [ TEMPLATE_FILE ]
.br
.B confgen --json-opt
.RI [ CONFGENFILE ]
.br
.B confgen --file
.RI [ TEMPLATE_FILE ]
.RI [ OUTFILE ]
.br
.B confgen --help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Confgen
is a template engine based around the Lua language primarily intended for generating
.I configuration
.IR files .

Each configuration file is declared as a
.I template file
which is first compiled into Lua code and then evaluated to collect its output.
This may be used to, for example, insert shared values such as fonts into a (configuration) file.

When neither
.B --compile
nor
.B --json-opt
are provided, confgen will take the given
.IR confgenfile ,
typically named
.IR confgen.lua ,
collect the files to process as well as options and any possible callbacks from it, and generate all
file into the given
.IR outpath .

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help
Show a help message.

.TP
.B --compile
Do not generate any files, instead, compile the template file at the given path
into it's internal lua representation and print it to
.IR STDOUT .
This is useful for debugging templates that might be causing errors.

.TP
.B --json-opt
Do not generate any files, instead, collect options and output them to
.I STDOUT
in
.I JSON
format.

For the specifics of this, see the documentation for the
.I cg.toJSON
function in
.BR confgen (3).

.TP
.B --file
Do not generate files like normal, but instead load the 
.I template file
identified by the
.IR first\ argument ,
generate it and write the output to the file specified by the
.IR second\ argument .

The
.I opt
table will be empty and functions that normally add files to be generated will have no effect.

.TP
.B --eval [CODE]
Evaluate the given
.I lua code
before loading the
.IR confgenfile .

.TP
.B --post-eval [CODE]
Evaluate the given
.I lua code
after loading the
.IR confgenfile .

.TP
.B --watch
Watch for changes on 
.I input files
and regenerate them when they're edited. If the 
.I confgenfile
is changed, the entire state will be re-loaded.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR confgen (3),
.BR confgen.lua (5),
.BR confgen-template (5),
.BR confgenfs (1)
