.TH CONFGENFS 1 "2024\-03\-22"
.SH NAME
.B confgenfs
\- FUSE3 filesystem for the
.I confgen
template engine.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B confgenfs
.RI [ CONFGENFILE ]
.RI [ MOUNTPOINT ]
.RI < --eval\ [CODE] >
.RI < --post-eval\ [CODE] >
.br
.B confgenfs --help

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ConfgenFS
behaves somewhat similarly to
.I Confgen
in the sense that it also evaluates a given
.IR confgenfile ,
however, it will not generate the files immediately but instead mount a
.I read-only
version of them at the specified
.I mountpoint
as a FUSE3 filesystem.
The resulting filesystem will generate configuration files once they're
.IR opened ,
intentionally without caching. The advantage of this is that configuration file templates may be
.IR non-deterministic ,
making it possible to have them adjust to the current state of the system.

The filesystem will only report file sizes for
.I non-template
files, as templated files do not necessarily have a deterministic size. A drawback that results of
this is that a few applications will naively assume that this means the file is empty and not attempt
to read it, however this has only been observed in rare cases.

Additionally, confgenfs allows interfacing with the running filesystem via
.I special files
located at
.B _cgfs
inside the filesystem.

.SS SPECIAL FILES
.TP
.B _cgfs/eval
This file is writable. When data is written to this file,
.B ConfgenFS
will cache it until the file is closed. It will then attempt to evaluate all written data as
.I Lua code
in the same context as the templates. This allows changing options at runtime, for example.

.TP
.B _cgfs/opts.json
This file will contain a read-only version of
.I cg.opt
in JSON format, similar to
.IR confgen 's \ --json-opt
parameter.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --help
Show a help message.

.TP
.B --eval [CODE]
Evaluate the given
.I lua code
before loading the
.IR confgenfile .

.TP
.B --post-eval [CODE]
Evaluate the given
.I lua code
after loading the
.IR confgenfile .


.SH EXAMPLES
Change an option representing the currently in-use wayland compositor at runtime by executing
the following shellcode in a startup script. The code assumes
.B ConfgenFS
is mounted at
.IR ~/confgenfs .

.RS 4
echo 'cg.opt.wayland_compositor = "sway"' > ~/confgenfs/_cgfs/eval
.RE

A hypothetical template for, for example, a bar's configuration could then operate on
.IR opt.wayland_compositor .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR confgen (1),
.BR confgen (3),
.BR fuse (4),
.BR confgen.lua (5),
.BR confgen-template (5)
