.TH CONFGEN-TEMPLATE 5 "2024\-03\-22"
.SH NAME
.B Confgen Template
\- The
.I .cgt
file format.

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I .cgt
file format is a format for configuration file templates that is processed by
.I Confgen
to generate configuration files. It has a very simple syntax.

.B Confgen Templates
may contain any arbitrary data. A template is only invalid if it either compiles to invalid Lua
code, or contains unclosed delimiters.

.SS SYNTAX
The confgen format consists of only 2 syntactic elements that may be present on top of the
underlying configuration format:

.TP
.B <% lua-expression %>
This inserts the value of the inner
.I Lua expression
in place of the token. One can think of this as being syntactic sugar for
.I <! tmpl:pushValue(lua-expression)
.IR !> .
This is explained later.
The spacing around the inner code is not neccesary, but strongly encouraged.

.TP
.B <! lua-code !>
This inserts arbitrary
.I Lua code
in the compiled template. This is how control flow is created inside
.B confgen
.BR templates .
The spacing around the inner code is not neccesary, but strongly encouraged.
.ES

.SS CONCEPT
.B Confgen Templates
are compiled to
.I Lua code
by confgen. One must keep this in mind when writing them!

The compiled
.I Lua code
is then run to generate the final output.
The output is created by appending to an output buffer. This buffer is stored in the
.I tmpl
object and may be appended to using various functions described in
.IR confgen (3).

This compiled
.I Lua code
is created in a simple fashion:

.IP \(bu
If unenclosed data is encountered, save that data internally in the
.I tmplcode object
and append
.I tmpl:pushLitIdx(tmplcode, N)
to the compiled template Lua code, where
.I N
is an index to the interned data.

.IP \(bu
If a
.I lua-expression
block is encountered, append 
.I tmpl:pushValue(VALUE)
to the template code, where
.I VALUE
is the exact code inside the block.

.IP \(bu
If a
.I lua-code
block is encountered, append its inner code to the template code
.IR as-is .

.P
A template will have full access to all Lua globals as well as the full Lua library.
Additionally, the value of
.I cg.opt
will be available in global scope simply as
.I opt
for brevity.

This API is described in
.BR confgen (3).
A template is free to call into any of the mentioned functions manually, this is not discouraged.

.SH EXAMPLES
This is a template for a hypothetical terminal emulator configuration file, demonstrating all the
capabilities of the format.

.RS 4
<! -- This is how a comment is conventionally written
   -- It's simple Lua code! !>
.br
font = <% opt.font %>

<! if opt.font_size then !>
.br
font-size = <% opt.font_size %>
.br
<! end !>

<! for i, col in ipairs(opt.color_palette) do !>
.br
color<% i %> = <% col %>
.br
<! end !>
.RE
One may examine the generated code using
.IR confgen\ --compile .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR confgen (1),
.BR confgen (3),
.BR confgen.lua (5),
.BR confgenfs (1)
